Once around, Ross 128.
So, Ross 128 can be found just near the
bowl of the constellation of Virgo. It's
a little red dwarf star marked by the
red dot on this slide there and very,
very close to the dotted red line. That
is the path of the ecliptic.
faint magnitude 11.3, but that's
achievable with a lot of different uh
amateur telescopes these days, I'm sure.
So, worth going and having a look for
this little tiny red dwarf star once
you've finished surfing all those
galaxies in the uh constellation of
Virgo up in the bowl there. Just drop
down to the ecliptic, very near to that
uh corner star there, and it's easy to
find.
And it was identified as interesting
back in 1926
by FE Ross. He made a catalog of stars
with high proper motion. So the change
in position year on year on year as a
nearby star moves around the galaxy and
the aspect against the background stars
changes. So when we see high proper
motion, we can infer that this is
probably a nearby star. And indeed it is
because Ross 128 is just 11 light years
away and the 12th closest overall star
system uh to the Milky Way. Uh not to
the Milky Way, to the sun. It's in the
Milky Way. And I was thinking about the
fact that it orbits around the Milky Way
71,000 years from now. that trajectory
is going to bring it to become the
nearest star to the sun. You can see the
paths of the nearest star systems. We've
got the Alpha Centuri system with
Proxima Centuri and you can see the blue
dotted line shows that today those are
the closest stars. But Barnard star is
going to take over in uh a few thousand
years time as being the nearest. And as
we go on the others, including right at
the right hand end, we get to the point
where all the others have moved away and
Ross 128 picks up the uh position as
being the nearest star at a distance of
6.2 light years.
It's a red dwarf, class M4, 18% the mass
of our sun, so not the smallest, 20% the
radius.
and 3,180
Kelvin. So, above the 3,00 Kelvin
transition temperature, that tends to
mean that uh molecules can't form in the
star itself. They can form in the outer
envelope of it, of course. So, we see
them in absorption lines in the
spectrum. And that lower mass reduces
the power output. It's 1/300th of the
overall
power output, heat output of the sun.
Now, in terms of age, it's interesting.
It's slightly lower in heavy metals than
the sun. And this tends to suggest that
it was formed earlier than the sun and
gives us an estimate of five uh billion
years. But the other constraints we can
put on it are to say there is no
lithium. The lithium's all been burnt up
by uh the process of uh picking up a
proton and fishing into two helium
nuclei. And that tends to happen in the
first 100 million years of a star. So
it's it's at least that old. Um but it's
rotating very very slowly. And that
tends to mean it has slowed right down.
um spun down caused by interactions of
its magnetic field with the solar wind
or the stellar wind that it's giving
out. So it could well be 5 billion years
old, but it's very hard to estimate in
some of these cases. Now, it's got a
lifetime of around a trillion years,
this sort of mass. It's going to run on
economy for a very long time. And with
uh only 20% the fuel, it's going to live
uh a hund times longer than our sun
overall just cuz it's so efficient and
uses all the fuel very slowly. But
eventually it's going to end its days as
a helium white dwarf. It will uh have
consumed all the hydrogen leaving a ball
of helium nuclei. it won't have the
temperature and pressure in the core to
do any further fusion of helium to
carbon.
And so this ball of helium will just sit
there and uh contract down to a size
dominated by the uh pressure of the
electrons that are holding the star up.
And then it will gradually cool down and
eventually become a black dwarf. But
that's such a long time into the future
and it's never happened yet. So it's
entirely a sort of theoretical guess
estimate.
Now I'm very interested in exoplanets
and so the question for Ross 128 is does
it have one? And the answer is yes. Ross
128b was detected using the HARPS
spectrometer in Chile. uh radial
velocity detection of the wobble of the
star induced by the orbit of the planet.
And in this case that orbit is quite
close. We have a planet with 1.8 time
Earth's mass and 1.6 times the radius.
So a little denser. Um and uh orbiting
round the
star in just 10 days.
That's a very close orbit. 120th of the
Earth's orbit, 0.0.5
astronomical units. And at that
distance, it's going to be getting 1.4
times as much heat as the Earth does.
And so, this is going to be not really a
super Earth, but more of a super Venus,
I would suggest. Certainly, it has any
atmosphere at all. It's going to be
trapping a lot of heat and getting very
hot indeed with 140% of the heat energy
arising.
Back in 1972,
a flare was detected on the star. Red
dwarfs do tend to be flare stars, some
more than others. Uh, this one's got a
very, very low rate of flaring. And so,
we haven't seen very many. It's classed
as an U FI vaginis flare star. And uh
you can see the flare in the ultraviolet
where the purple trace picks up whereas
the uh blue and uh green lines are not
really peing very much at all. A little
bit. And uh this is in likely that this
incredibly slow rotation due to this
very old age is meaning that there's a
less powerful magnetic field and
therefore we are now uh not seeing so
many star spots and flares on Ross 128.
But the really interesting thing that
came up with this rather uninteresting
little red dwarf star, albeit with a
planet um that uh we've already
described, Ross 128B, was the detection
of the weird signal back in 2017.
This was a very unusual pattern within
the radio trace picked up by radio
telescopes using Arisibo on May the
12th, I think it was, of 2017.
They picked up a strange wideband radio
signal that seemed to have a periodicity
to it. You can really see it in that
central red square there where there's a
modeled region. It's not terribly
distinct, but it is there. And nobody
could explain this, hence the
designation, what's that weird signal?
Now, there is a possibility that this
was man-made. And the reason for that is
that this star along with its uh
counterpart Wolf 359 that's in another
of my videos sit on the ecliptic plane.
they are pretty much lined up. We showed
that in the first diagram where it's
just on that red dotted line where the
planets tend to live. But it's not just
the planets or the sun that tend to be
in that part of the sky, but the
ecliptic plane is a pretty popular place
for satellites, for geostationary
satellites. And so a geostationary
satellite could have been responsible
for this radio signal or it could have
been interference between more than one
geo synchronous satellite. And that
seems to be the favorite explanation
because it's never aliens until it's
aliens. But uh I'm not sure that we're
really certain that this was a
satellite.
So, I'll just leave you with the weird
signal and the possibility that we're
going to find more and more of these
exoplanets around these nearby stars as
we go on. So, that's it for now. Thanks
very much for listening. That was once
around Ross 128.